book+brotherhood.murdoch.oct89:blackened *his consciousness. He had not realised how solitary he was, or had now become. He had been lonely as a child, but when he was a student
book+brotherhood.murdoch.oct89:dinner or supper or whatever it was. Alcohol can open the dark gates *of the unconscious and through this orifice there flooded upon Lily, in the name
book+brotherhood.murdoch.oct89:crawled out of my unconscious mind and is sitting beside me! Why should he fasten onto me? He's making me feel not only miserable but bad, rotten,
book+brotherhood.murdoch.oct89:emerging from the unconscious minds *of his flock, or from whatever the places are where demons live. 
book+brotherhood.murdoch.oct89:published a book which no one read or noticed. What was now seeping into her troubled consciousness like a dark dye was *the thought that Crimond
book+brotherhood.murdoch.oct89:its message into his unconscious mind, had produced this strange shock, and even now, after Gerard had realised that this writing was portentous,
bridesmaid.rendell:ON ONE LEVEL OF CONSCIOUSNESS, BUT ON ANOTHER which seemed most to affect his
bridesmaid.rendell:him, it did seem almost a living thing, which ENTERED HIS CONSCIOUSNESS when
bridesmaid.rendell:WORRIES AND NO FEARS.*) But (* AS IF HIS CONSCIOUSNESS DIDN'T WANT HIM TO BE
dorrit-cohn.transp-minds:{\it Transparent minds: Narrative modes for presenting consciousness in fiction.}
duncton-wood.22feb94:was barely conscious that she was learning anything. Like the
duncton-wood.22feb94:half conscious, he heard a fifth mole slowly enter the chamber
rectors-wife.dec94:greyish stone window that framed it.  He was conscious of very little
rectors-wife.dec94:of joys, going off his head.  His unconscious mind had known what his
rectors-wife.dec94:conscious mind had refused to know.  In a curious way, he felt himself to
rendell.painted-devil:arms of Old Paul Gaveston who, to CONSCIOUS of the proprieties to hold
rendell.painted-devil:subconscious of which he had been UNAWARE.  Worst of all was the
rendell.painted-devil:He jolted out of sleep to a shrill insistent ringing.  CONSCIOUSNESS,
rendell.painted-devil:CONSCIOUS that on his way round The Circle he had passed Sheila
rendell.painted-devil:he wanted to stop her.  Almost unconsciously he fumbled along the
rendell.painted-devil:HER MIND THROUGH THAT RICH, JUMBLED SUBCONSCIOUS, and then perhaps it
rendell.painted-devil:it was my SUBCONSCIOUS that gave it that meaning.  I KNEW that Patrick
rendell.painted-devil.margarita:arms of Old Paul Gaveston who, to CONSCIOUS of the proprieties to hold
rendell.painted-devil.margarita:subconscious of which he had been UNAWARE.  Worst of all was the
rendell.painted-devil.margarita:He jolted out of sleep to a shrill insistent ringing.  CONSCIOUSNESS,
rendell.painted-devil.margarita:CONSCIOUS that on his way round The Circle he had passed Sheila
rendell.painted-devil.margarita:he wanted to stop her.  Almost unconsciously he fumbled along the
rendell.painted-devil.margarita:HER MIND THROUGH THAT RICH, JUMBLED SUBCONSCIOUS, and then perhaps it
rendell.painted-devil.margarita:it was my SUBCONSCIOUS that gave it that meaning.  I KNEW that Patrick
stillness-dancing.perriam.oct94:body, floated off from it, so that (* HER MIND AND CONSCIOUSNESS WERE SEPARATE
trollope+tyler.garg.20feb94:that framed it. He was conscious of very little except
trollope+tyler.garg.20feb94:oh, joy of joys, going off his head. **His unconscious
trollope+tyler.garg.20feb94:mind had known what his conscious mind had refused
