((Done by Wendy Dare, summer 91))



\fIPARENTS\FR  February 1984

LOVE AND MARRIAGE  PAGES 24-28

\fIWhose child is he, anyway?\fR

Q:  My problem is my unmarried sister-in-law.  She THINKS that I
should let her make the decisions about my six-month-old son's life.
She ALSO BELIEVES he's gifted, and I'm AFRAID THAT when he gets older
HER ASSUMPTION could hurt him if he's not overly smart.  How can I
politely tell her to knock it off?
A:  The first thing to REALIZE is that the baby is yours and your
husbands's, not your sister-in-law's.  Therefore, there is no
intrinsic reason for you to feel threatened by her statements since
you will be making all the decisions about your son.

In her unmarried state, does she feel rejected and swept aside or is
she single by choice?  If she FEELS that she is missing something
critical in not having a child of her own, her tendency may be to VIEW
your son as a kind of substitute and to invest him with all her
fantasies of how she would raise her own child.  Her BELIEF that he is
gifted would tend to support this interpretation.  If you think back
to your own life before marriage and the birth of your son, you might
REMEMBER THINKING about what it would be like to have a baby.  Those
are widespread fantasies among both men and women, and it seems likely
that your sister-in-law is expressing hers with respect to your son.
   You could encourage some personal talks about her own life and the
EXPECTATIONS she would have for a child of her own.  You or your
husband might gently indicate that while you APPRECIATE her interest
in her nephew, decision about him rest with you.  You might even
develop a kind of bantering tone when you deal with her specific
suggestions.  

\fIShe's lost that loving feeling.\fR

A:  You do not indicate if your wife's loss of interest was sudden or
a more gradual process that you BECAME AWARE of only a year and a half
ago.  Were there previous episodes of disinterest on her part, or on
yours?  

Many aspects of a couple's relationship change when children arrive,
and frequently their sexual relationship is a casualty of the altered
patterns and increased responsibility.  If, when YOU THINK ABOUT it,
YOU REALIZE that her INTEREST DWINDLED over time, you might discuss
with her the many changes your life together has gone through since
the birth of your children.  Of course, if her INTEREST DECLINED
ABRUPTLY, then what you need to search for is some specific incident
that precipitated her sexual withdrawal.
   Even without her detailing it for you, you could examine your own
sexual activity.

Sex in an extremely important part of marriage, and therefore it is
worth conquering the difficulties involved in frankly discussing it.  
   You might CONSIDER going away for a day or two alone together in
order to talk out your mutual concerns.  Sometimes, difficult problems
yield SURPRISINGLY easily to real communication in an unhurried and
nonpressured atmosphere.
   One caution, though:  If you do go away to discuss these issues,
plan to do other things too, so the episode doesn't become so HEAVY
that you become MIRED IN THE WEIGHT OF YOUR DISCUSSION!

My husband is not supportive of my plans.
A:  Taking on the responsibility of a baby can be scary, and your
husband may be FOCUSING ON that to the exclusion of any other concern.
It may be that the arrival of the baby represents so much change for
him that he cannot easily ACCEPT other changes in life.  Sometimes
people facing difficult alterations in their lives try to restrict all
other changes to the minimum as a way of maintaining some basic
stability.  

But his reaction probably also relates to the nature of the changes
that are occurring.
   People who are not fully sure of themselves have difficulty
ACCEPTING the dependency of others.  Your husband has been ACCUSTOMED
to having a self-sufficient wife.  Previously he did not have to
ACCEPT your dependence, and he could also be dependent on you to some
degree.  A baby's entrance into that situation adds a dependent
individual.

That can be quite a challenge to someone who may appear to be surer of
himself than he actually feels.  In such a case, the FOCUS OF THE
ANXIETY can be on the wife who is becoming dependent, rather than on
the baby.  
   If this analysis fits your husband's and your situation, then it
might be important to reassure you husband that your dependency is
indeed a temporary state.  He may FEAR THAT you'll get used to--and
come to LIKE--being at home with the baby and not go back to work.
Since at this point that is not your PLAN, you might indicate that a
skilled field offers a more permanent attraction to you than simply
working at a job that you don't FIND satisfying, and, therefore, going
back to school will likely result in you long-term employment.
   For the long term in your marriage, however, it would appear
important to establish open communication about your mutual hopes and
desires in an effort to develop a greater sense of partnership.

pages 32-35  \fILove, Honor And Work Together\fR

In yet another twist, some married couples are specifically hired
together, for example, as a management-consultant team.
   Working with your husband offers many benefits, not the least of
which is each of you UNDERSTANDS what the other's work life is like.
But there are disadvantages as well.

"The wife is usually recruited to work in the new venture since few
start-ups can afford all the employees they need."
   One year after their marriage in 1973, Marsha Weinmann's husband
DECIDED to start a landscaping business.  At first, Marsha helped out
in her free time--typing some letters for the business on her breaks
at work or balancing the books in the evenings at home.

   The one difficulty Marsha has is with friends, family, and clients
who can't understand her role in the business.  "I THINK it has to do
with my working at home.  The women in the neighborhood can't
UNDERSTAND why I can't take off to the park.  They don't REALIZE that
the business is an equal partnership.  I'm not my husband's employee."

   Couples who run a business together have unique problems to work
out.  Many FIND it difficult to change hats from work to home life and
to set aside any time to relax.

"We don't find the proper means of relaxation."
   Although a business can CLAIM ALL OF YOUR TIME AND THOUGHT, giving
in to its demands can damage your personal relations.  At the seminars
she chairs on family businesses, Katy Danco urges couples to develop
relaxation goals as well as business goals.

Difficulties with the business can't be turned off at 5 p.m.  "If it's
doing well, he FEELS good and proud of himself," says Pamela
Harrington about the bar she and her husband own in South Dakota.  "If
it's not, he FEELS AS IF something were wrong with him."

"The only way we've been able to manage is to make sure home is a
place away from work," says Becky.  Other couples DECIDE in advance
whether the dinner they have at home will be a family dinner or a
family-business dinner.  Yet another approach is to set aside a
specific period when business will not be discussed, such as from the
time the couple arrive home each evening until the children are put to
bed.

   While at home personal time is important, at work the couple must
clarify their professional roles so that they don't get involved in
destructive competition.  "I don't KNOW of a successful couple who
compete with each other," says Katy Danco.
   She advises couple to each identify their strong points and SEE HOW
they can complement each other in the business.
   At Mrs. Fields Cookies, a successful national network of cookie
stores with corporate headquarters in Park City, Utah, co-owners Debbi
and Randy Fields have done just that.

Her husband, Randy, who also has his own financial-consulting firm,
handles the financial side.  "We try not to step on each other's
toes," says Debbi, "but if one has AN IDEA about something the other
person is doing, we talk about it.  We tend to talk business most of
the time, but we love it."

Otherwise, life could be difficult for the Fieldses as well as for
their 600 employees.  "Professional managers are WARY OF working for a
husband-and-wife team," acknowledges Randy.  "They're AFRAID OF being
caught in the crossfire of a divorce situation."
   As a business becomes more successful, new emotional issues arise.

"But eventually, the husband may take a larger role and the wife may
become jealous."  As the business develops, the husband may FEEL he is
doing his wife a favor by hiring other people to take over some of her
responsibilities--but she MAY feel pushed out.
   In the case of Mrs. Fields Cookies, Debbi is the chief executive
and the visible symbol of the firm, while her husband works behind the
scenes.  This doesn't BOTHER Randy because, he explains, they have
carefully worked out their individual roles.  "We KNOW we are both
important to the business."
   
   Couples who work together need to project a professional image so
that their close relationship won't upset fellow workers or customers.
   One special-education teacher FOUND herself in the awkward position
of having her husband as her boss when he was made the assistant
school superintendent in charge of special education.  They handled
the situation between themselves by never talking about their jobs at
home.  But the teacher FOUND it more difficult to deal with her
colleagues who also reported to her husband.  "They EXPECTED me to
answer for every little they disliked about the job he was doing," she
says.
   "If someone comes to you KNOWING you have a direct line to your
spouse, the boss, tell him or her that you don't talk business at
home," advises Katy Danco.  "Tell your colleague to talk directly to
your spouse.  Otherwise, you'll be caught in the middle, with
RESENTMENT on both sides."
   Working with one's husband isn't for everyone.  One woman who owned
a store with her husband FOUND she got jealous whenever he talked to a
female customer or took a woman business associate to lunch.

\fIBanned Books\fR

I ABHOR censorship.  It insults my intelligence, erodes my personal
independence, and limits my access to IDEAS and information.  No one
else, I BELIEVE, has a right to DECIDE for me what books I can read or
what points of view may be expressed.  So when I hear of numerous
cases of attmepted censorship of school curricula and textbooks, my
first reaction is one of DEEP CONCERN.
   Unfortunately, however, my personal VIEW of censorship is a little
simplistic when it comes to materials used in schools.  For example,
some publishers of late have been issuing ethnic and racial "joke
books" filled with crude stereotypes of Jews, blacks, Poles, white
Protestants, etc.  Do I WANT the librarians in my schools to show
pornographic films or to purchase textbooks that are inaccurate,
untruthful, or biased?  When my staff and I begin making such
DECISIONS, however, we FIND ourselves easing into the role of censor.
   Parents have every right to EXPECT that schools will exercise
careful choice when selecting books and materials for children.  But
the standards of the school and any particular parent may differ
widely.  For example, those people who ADHERE to a strict biblical
interpretation of the origins of life may object to the teaching of
the concept of evolution in high school biology courses.  WANTING to
sell more books, publishers BELIEVE this can be accomplished by making
them less specific or less complete and thus may omit the mention of
the CONCEPT of evolution.  FROM MY POINT OF VIEW, however, a biology
text that does not report the evidence on evolution is seriously
deficient.
   Teachers, administrators, and school boards are caught in a dilemma.
In their role as parent surrogates, they try to respect and support
the VALUES of the child's home and the family.  Yet in a sprawling
nation like this there are vast differences in the VALUES espoused.
Consequently, schools often seek to avoid controversy by removing or
failing to use all but the most bland and balanced materials.  Such
timidity on the part of the schools may be the most serious form of
censorship.  Avoiding controversial material narrows the OUTLOOK of
children and gives them an unrealistic VIEW of the world.  One of the
major functions of a good school, after all, is to teach children to
acquire the full range of KNOWLEDGE needed for sound judgements.
   When school administrators bend over backward to avoid
controversial books they may UNWITTINGLY back into hot criticism from
\fIboth\fR left and right.  Liberals accuse the schools of caution
that borders on censorship, while conservatives like Mel and Norma
Gabler, who run a conservative textbook-review service, claim schools
try to influence children by using books that are too liberal.
"Government force, through schools," claim the Gablers, "has gradually
eliminated [banned, censored] practically all books that uphold,
promote, or teach the basic VALUES upon which our nation was founded."
That's a rather sweeping challenge to the judgment of the board
members of America's 15,835 separate school districts and the
principals and teachers in 86,682 school.
   I FIND that in daily practice public schools are more apt to be
\fIconserving\fR institutions mirroring rather than challenging the
values of the local culture.  Yet we live in a time when the goals and
IDEALS of our society are hotly debated.  Because these VALUES are in
flux, schools SEEM UNCERTAIN of what stand to take and the vacuum
invites contradictory cries of censorship from left, right, and
middle.
   In disentangling the complex issues of school censorship, sensible,
concerned parents can be of enormous help.

   \fB1. Discuss complex IDEAS AND ISSUES with your child.\fB  When
differing VIEWPOINTS on social questions arise, use the occasion to
discuss these with your child.  Young children SEEK security by
CONFIRMING things as definitely right or wrong and need gradually to
discover the complexity of many issues that leads fair-minded people
to differing conclusions.  When such discussions are a part of the
natural, informal curriculum of the home, it is easier for children to
confront and examine divergent views as their schooling progresses.

   \fB2. Encourage pluralism.\fR  Regardless of the makeup of your own
community, you do your child a great favor by helping him or her grow
up with an ENLARGING APPRECIATION of the ways and views of people of
different ethnic, racial, religious, and national origins and
cultures.  Children who gradually come to understand human diversity
have a great advantage in adult life as they leave their immediate
home ground.  ENCOURAGE school materials and curricula that reflect
the rich pluralism in our society.  Schools that incorporate this
broader outlook in their curriculum have a firmer base for
interpreting and deflecting the thrusts of the censors.

   \fB3. Be alert to blind spots.\fB  If a school says they don't use
multiethnic textbooks, for example, because all the residents are of
one race, REMIND the school authorities of the short-sightedness of
such ethnocentrism.

   \fB5. Confer with teachers.\fR  As a parent, you should discuss
directlly with teachers and principals any QUESTIONS you have about
particular instructional materials or curricula.  At least half of the
so-called censorship cases are really questions of the appropriateness
of the materials for children of a certain age.  A good novel for the
tenth grade can cause an uproar if placed in the hands of a sixth
grader.  Similarly, you may be able to help a concerned neighbor
UNDERSTAND that some controversial books are better used in class
under a teacher's guidance than simply read by students unaided.

Such matters must be talked out in public.  When communities have such
discussions, the open, responsible expression of strongly held VIEWS
serves as a valuable lesson for children growing up in a democracy.

pages 67-70 & 149  \fISpeaking Of Sex\fr

Over her husband's shoulder, the wife notices their four-year-old,
watching wide-eyed and fascinated.  HOW MUCH HAS THE CHILD SEEN OR
UNDERSTOOD?  What will it mean as the child grows up?

   For three years, beginning in 1978, Dr. Alvin A. Rosenfeld,
formerly professor of psychiatry and director of training in child
psychiatry at Stanford University in California, surveyed 425
upper-middle-class  California families with children between the ages
of two and ten.  Rosenfeld's study focused on parental PERCEPTIONS of
children's behavior with regard to sexual issues.  He also studied the
family atmosphere that develops around issues of intimacy and
sexuality in early life.  He observed the small, everyday exchanges,
the unspoken ways that parents, children, and the culture at large
interact and influence behavior and ATTITUDES toward modesty,
openness, comfort, or anxiety about sexuality.
   Until now, much of what we've been told about how sexuality
develops has been based on what doctors SAW in the families of
troubled children.  It's helpful--and reassuring--finally to SEE what
happens in healthy, caring, and committed families like the ones in
this survey.
   What these parents do is often different from what the experts tell
them to do.

Most of the time the children are allowed to stay in the parental bed
until they're soothed, usually half an hour, or until they fall
asleep.
   Most children are equally CONTENT to lie down next to either the
mother or father or to snuggle between the two parents.  About one
third of the children prefer one side of the bed to the other, and
then it's usually the mother's side.  Some psychiatrists have
speculated that choosing the mother's side is a sign of marital
discord, but Rosenfeld found no evidence of that.
   Not SURPRISINGLY, younger children come to the parents' bed more
often .  With two-year-olds, who may have to climb out of a crib to
reach the parents, it happens once a week to once a month.  With
nine-year-olds it may happen once or twice a year.
   Why do experts WORRY ABOUT this parent-child coziness?  One fear is
that once you let your child into your warm bed, you'll never get him
back into his own.  

   "Our research doesn't prove that taking a child into your bed is
good or bad, only that it's common," says Rosenfeld.  When doctors
explore the history of an emotionally disturbed adult, they ofter FIND
THAT there was "co-sleeping," as they call it, in the patient's
childhood.  Yet, it if's as common as this survey shows, it may be
that something else, something disturbing, was happening in the
parental bed of children who grew up to be disturbed adults.

   Even if nothing out of the way happened, being in the parents' bed
can be too exciting for some young children.  Parents do need to be
AWARE of the young child who can't seem to lie still, is jumpy,
nervous, or overstimulated by being in their bed.
In an unhappy marriage, parents may use the child as a pawn; one of
them may invite the child into bed in order to avoid sex with his or
her partner.  Or a newly divorced mother may WANT the child there
because it's she, not the child, who's scared and lonely.
   "Somehow, the child SENSES that something is awry without KNOWING
exactly what it is," says Dr. Rosenfeld.  "It's impossible to KNOW how
the actual behavior differs.  Yet, the child SENSES in some way that
he's being used.  The RESULTING CONFUSION and EXCITEMENT can interfere
with a child's ability to develop a coherent sense of who he is and
lead to psychological difficulties." As Rosenfeld notes, there are
reports from other doctors of children who've regressed to bed-wetting
just to get out of the parents' bed.
   "The important thing is to be TUNED IN TO your child and to
yourselves as separate human beings," Rosenfeld explains.  "What
counts is that you're AWARE OF what the child's needs are at that
moment and the ways you as an individual feel most comfortable meeting
those needs."
   When you do meet them, it's a major lesson in what love is about.

\fB"The primal scene."\fR
   Rosenfeld reports that parents who are in tune with their own INNER
PSYCHOLOGICAL LIFE are able to DETERMINE HOW to react to their own
children even if their response does not follow the advice of a
child-rearing text.  There is one area about which parents and experts
SEEM in total agreements, however, Rosenfeld says.  They both WORRY
ABOUT the young child who wanders into the parents' bedroom while his
or her parents are making love.  Psychiatrists have blamed the
childhood viewing of the sex act--a situation Freud called "the primal
scene"--for a long list of adult neuroses and psychoses.
   Yet it happens more often than most people REALIZE.  Dr. Rosenfeld
asked five separate groups of parents if they KNEW WHETHER their
children had ever walked in on their lovemaking.  The results ranged
from 9 percent to 41 percent of parents answering yes, it had
happened, usually just once.

According to the parents in Rosenfeld's survey, it usually takes place
when the child is between four and six years old, a time of great
sexual curiosity that Freud called "the Oedipal age."  Most children
seem to have walked in by accident, but a few were DETERMINED to catch
their parents.  "She was hiding in the closet," one mother reported to
Rosenfeld.  Another parent tells of a young child who climbed up to
the bedroom window to peek in.
   If the primal scene happens so frequently, are doctors right IN
BELIEVING it's universally traumatizing?  Dr. Aron Esman, professor of
clinical psychiatry at Cornell University Medical College in New York
City, did an important study of the psychiatric literature.  In most
of the case histories, the child UNDERSTOOD what he'd seen as
something bad, hurtful, or violent.  Yet, when Dr. Esman looked
further into those case histories, he FOUND that there was violence in
those families.  The father beat the mother or the child or both; or
he forced the mother into sex; or there was verbal abuse, yelling,
cursing, name-calling.  When children from this background described
what they'd seen in their parents' bedroom as sadomasochistic, they
may have been describing it very accurately for their own families.
   In less turbulent families, children may have a DIFFERENT SENSE of
what they're seeing.  "At best, the child will THINK THAT something
enjoyable is going on, and he'll feel jealous or excluded," says Dr.
Rosenfeld.  "He may also THINK of lovemaking as wrestling.  At worst,
the child will feel frightened because he doesn't understand what's
happening.  

\fBThe matter of privacy.\fR
   One moment doesn't make a childhood, but parents generally BELIEVE
that lovemaking should be private event.  Still, if a door is left
unlocked or if a child forget to knock before entering, it's
REASSURING TO KNOW that great numbers of children see this event
without being damaged for life.  Most parents manage to stay calm.

Both are important values, part of a child's education on how to live
in the family.
   When they are very little, children don't SEEM to have much
interest in privacy.  In their answers to Dr. Rosenfeld's questions,
parents of little children paint a picture of a shame-free,
clothes-free time. 

Suddenly, like a little Adam or Eve, the child notices that he is
naked and that the parent is naked.  Perhaps the child KNEW THAT all
along, but now the parent KNOWS THAT HE KNOWS.  For many parents, it's
a confused, bitter-sweet time.

The first embarrassment, with visitors and then with family members,
comes with being seen using the bathroom.  Typically, girls become
UPSET ABOUT being caught without their clothes at around age four.
With boys it happens around age five.

   In some families, parents say that it's the child, not they, who
begins to be modest.  One week a little girl doesn't MIND being seen
undressed; the next week she's UPSET by it.  Many times it's an early
instance of influence of other children the same age.

A mother who now prefers to dress in private explains, "I'm
uncomfortable because my son stares at my body.  It makes me WANT TO
hide."  When a child begins to show interest and curiosity, that's
when almost all parents begin to cover up.

In many families boys and girls may be bathed together until one of
them is six or seven years old.  Then the mother SEES OR SUSPECTS
SOMETHING that disturbs her.  Perhaps the little girl is staring at
her brother's penis or reaching to touch. 

   What does the child think then?  "I've never met a child who
BELIEVES being 'too old' is the real reason," says Dr. Rosenfeld. "The
child FEELS THAT the parent is acting that way because he's done
something naughty or unacceptable but he may not UNDERSTAND WHAT it
is.  It's in just this way," Dr. Rosenfeld continues, "that sexual
anxieties and discomforts about the body are passed along from one
generation to another."
   
At the same time, parents also received messages in their own
childhood, messages containing implicit standards that come out in the
parents' spontaneous remarks and behavior.  The parent does mean that
part of the message that says "stop it!" but may not REALIZE the other
effects the message will have.
   Some parents WORRY THAT they're not as open about sex as they THINK
they ought to be, and for that reason they may tend to be more open
than they really feel.  Children SENSE that uneasiness quickly.  As a
mother undresses in front of her son, if she's uncomfortable, he'll
sense it.  As she allows the brother and sister baths to continue
despite her feelings, her children SEE she feels awkward and tense.
   As Dr. Rosenfeld explains, "If you go against your real feelings,
you're denying all that is good about your sexuality, your warmth,
your moral sense.

   Honesty may be the way out of the dilemma.  "Why not tell the child
how you really feel?" suggests Rosenfeld.  "If you FEEL UNCOMFORTABLE
about the child seeing you without your clothes, why not just say
that?  It puts the burden on you, not the child.  It also lets the
child SEE THAT he has a real parent, someone who tells the truth and
also has a right to her own feelings."
   Another approach is to talk about privacy.  Instead of telling a
child she's "too old" to bathe with her brother, a parent can try
saying that now she's "old enough" to do certain things in private.
Children will also WANT privacy for themselves, whether or not they
KNOW HOW to request it.
   Privacy is a LARGE IDEA to teach, and it has to include more than
sexuality.  If a parent WANTS a child to knock at her bedroom door
before entering, she has to do the same when she's at the child's
door.  It means not opening the child's mail, even if it's just a
birthday card from Grandma.


pages 72-77  \fILearning To Love Video Games\fR

A mother of two teenagers complained that children were using their
lunch money to play the games.  She said, "I REMINDS me of smoking.
Smoking doesn't do us any bit of good.  It's addictive and it's
expensive, and this is what these games are....There are kids who
cannot stay away from them."
   Her concern has been echoed in public hearings across the country
as parents grow more ANXIOUS about the time and money spent on video
games, the unsavory setting of some of the arcades, and the often
violent content of the games.  
   To what extent are parents' WORRIES WARRANTED?  And is it really
true the games don't do us "any bit of good?"
   As yet there is little research available to answer these questions
definitively, but I BELIEVE that video games, far from being
worthless, may be teaching children skills that put them way ahead of
adults in certain areas--but first let me address parents' specific
worries.

Only 7 percent spent lunch money.  In fact, he FOUND THAT because they
are better players than adults, playing arcade games isn't as
expensive for youngsters as for their elders.  In the world of video
games, isn't as expensive for youngsters as for their elders.

In contrast, Edna Mitchell, professor of education at Mills College,
had twenty northern California families keep diaries for a week each
month for five months after purchasing an Atari game set.  She FOUND
THAT the game sets were used an average of 42 minutes a day per
\fIfamily\fR, hardly an addictive pattern, especially as compared with
television. 
   Brooks found some young people who felt compelled to play, but they
were a monority.  In fact, he FOUND THAT about half his respondents
were playing games less than half the time they were in the arcade.
Instead, they were socializing.

\fBThe allure of action.\fR
   Although there is little evidence that video games are addictive,
they are alluring and to some degree parents' CONCERNS may be a
reaction to this allure.  What is its basis?
   Video games have the dynamic visual element of television and film
that has been found to be key in attracting the ATTENTION of young
children.  However, they are also interactive.  What happens on the
screen is not only determined by the computer, it is also very much
influenced by the player's actions.  Video games are the first medium
to combine moving visual images with an active, participatory role for
the child.
   What evidence exists that a DESIRE for interaction is an important
motivation in computer games as compared with television?  Although to
my KNOWLEDGE no systematic research exists on this subject, studies in
other settings have compared children's PREFERENCES for things to
observe versus things to interact with.  According to researcher
Sherman Rosenfeld of the Weizmann Institute of Science in Israel, the
most predictable pattern in all of these studies, whether the setting
was a zoo, a museum, or an aquarium, can be described as the search
for interactive experiences.

The children in her sample watched less television after getting their
video-game sets.  This is further corroborated by my informal
interviews with children who were unanimous in saying they PREFERRED
the games to television and for the same reason:  active control.
   The meaning of control was both very concrete for the younger
children.  One nine-year-old girl said, "In TV if you WANT to make
someone die, you can't.  In Pac-Man, if you WANT to run into a ghost
you can."   

\fBVideo games and violence.\fR
   So far parents' WORRIES seem over-blown, with the exception of
concern about the atmosphere of the arcades themselves.  However, one
additional criticism merits attention:  the content of the great
majority of the games available in public places is violent.

The first evidence is in that violent video games do greed aggressive
behavior, just as violent television shows do.  Researchers Steve B.
Silvern, Peter A. Williamson, and Terry A. Countermine of Auburn
University FOUND that both Space Invaders and Roadrunner raise the
level of aggressive play and lower the level of pro-social play in
five-year-old children.
   The effects of video violence are not simple, however.  The same
researchers have more recently FOUND that two-player aggressive video
games, whether cooperative or competitive, reduce the level of
aggression in children's play.
   Another complex aspect of video violence is that it is more
APPEALING to boys than to girls--a fact borne out for any casual
observer by a visit to a video arcade where boys for outnumber girls.
The work of one researcher, Thomas Malone of the Massachusetts
Institute Technology, provides substantiation.

   This sex difference has important social implications:  Do we want
to reinforce the male potential for aggressive behavior through yet
another entertainment medium?  Moreover, if children's INTEREST in
computers begins with games, as indeed it does, then the fact that the
most common computer games involve aggressive and violent fantasy may
have the effect of turning many girls away from computers.  This would
be unfortunate in a field that is still expanding rapidly and
therefore should be especially promising for women.

\fBMust games bo violent?\fR
   Despite the APPEAL of violent fantasy, at least to boys, it may not
be a necessary ingredient to ensure a game's popularity.  In a study
of children's motivation for playing video games on computers in the
school setting Malone FOUND that among children five to thirteen the
PREFERRED game was Petball, a version of computer pinball, a game that
has no obvious aggression in it at all.

Recent television research supports this conclusion:  new findings by
Aletha Huston and John Wright at the University of Kansas show that
action, not violence per se, is what attracts young people to the
screen.
   With this IN MIND, the Children's Computer Workshop (CCW), a
division of the Children's Television Workshop, is working on
educational software with action-game formats and nonviolent themes.
Their work recognizes that the medium of video games is in itself
neutral with respect to social values, but the choice of a game design
can have an important influence on children's behavior.

   Second, the skills required to play video games go far beyond
"mere" eye-hand coordination.  I am CONVINCED that many of those who
criticize the games would not be able to play them, and that their
difficulties would be greater than and different from a lack of
eye-hand coordination.  I BELIEVE that children who have watched
television from an early age and thus become adept at using dynamic
visual information become skilled at video games in a way many of
their elders do not.  Let me illustrate with the game of Pac-Man.
   When I played Pac-Man for the first time, I had watched it being
played, and I ASSUMED I would be able to play it myself.  But when I
started, I FOUND I could not even distinguish Pac-man from the other
blobs on the screen.  A little girl of about five had to explain the
game to me.
   After trying the game again, I THOUGHT I had the basics.  True, my
score was not very good, but I ASSUMED that was because my reflexes
were not fast and I lacked sensorimotor practice.  But I soon
DISCOVERED that I had missed all but the most obvious aspects of the
game.  Pac-Man is much more complex than I had IMAGINED, and most of
the complexities are of a sort that cannot be incorporated in
conventional board games such as checkers, chess, or Monopoly.
   In Pac-Man, as in other video games, no one tells the player the
rules governing Pac-Man's behavior or the behavior of his opponents,
the ghosts; these must be INDUCED from observation.  The player must
not only overcome obstacles but must also perform the inductive task
of FIGURING out the nature of the obstacles.  The behavior patterns he
must DISCOVER lie in the game's computer program.
   The real-time movement of video games is another source of their
complexity.  

   Pac-Man illustrates another cognitive requirement of skillful
videogame playing:  parallel processing.  This refers to the INTAKE of
information from several sources simultaneously, in contrast with
serial processing in which the MIND TAKES in information from one
source at a time.  To be a good Pac-man player you must simultaneously
keep track of Pac-Man, the four ghosts, where you are in the maze, and
four energizers that give Pac-Man power for a brief period if he eats
them.  

Pictoral images, in general, tend to elicit parallel processing while
verbal media, by contrast, because of the sequential nature of
language, tend to elicit serial processing.
   Video games embody yet another cognitive complexity impossible in
precomputer games:  the interaction of two elements yields results
that could not be PREDICTED from either one separately.  Thus, if you
watched Pac-Man's behavior alone, you could not DISCOVER the special
qualities of different parts of the maze.  Nor could you be watching
the ghosts' behavior alone.

Even inspection of the maze itself gives no clue.  Only by watching
the ghosts interacting with Pac-Man in different parts of the maze can
you DETECT its dynamic variables characterize almost all video games.
   Experimental work be Ted Kahn at the University of California at
Berkeley confirms that games that require the player to INDUCE the
relations among multiple interacting variables are difficult for many
people.  Furthermore, learning to play this type of game helps one
develop skills such as flexibility and an ORIENTATION TOWARD
independent achievement.
   Spatial skills are also developed by video games. 

Parts of a single story are linked by doors that, like the stairs,
serve as cues for integrating individual mazes into the layout of a
given story.
   When my son Matthew taught me the game, I completely MISSED the
aspect of spatial integration.  I treated the mazes as if they were
independent, unaware that they were linked in the third dimension
through stairs.  I even MISSED the connections between mazes on the
same level and did not REALIZE that to leave a maze by the same door
by which I entered was to go backward to an earlier maze instead of
advancing to a new one.  Matthew commented, "Most people REALIZE
\fIthat\fR even if they are not paying ATTENTION."  Apparently, the
ability to integrate different spatial perspectives has become
automatic for him, but not for me.  I DON'T KNOW what caused the
difference--the male's typically greater spatial ability, practice in
playing the games at a young age, familiarity with game formats, a
foundation of visual skills developed through watching television, or
all of these together, but it does SUGGEST that a good player has
skills in spatial integration and that these skills cannot be taken
for granted.
   All in all the variety of skills involved in the game SUGGESTS that
the child who becomes an expert may be developing the sensorimotor
level skills that he will use at an abstract level in higher
mathematics and science as he advances in school.

Far from being lazy or seeking mindless games, children seem to look
for challenge.
   The existence of multiple levels in video games may contribute to
their ALLURE.  The challenge of ever-new game condition, added to the
FEELING of control that children claim computer games give them,
creates a long-term APPEAL.  Rather than FEARING this appeal we can
harness it to make other learning experiences, particularly shcool,
more engrossing.  One way to do so may be to incorporate appropriate
video games into the curriculum in a multi-media approach to
education.

 
