((Done by Wendy Dare, summer 91))


  \fINewsweek\fR March 11, 1991.  

BYLINES-NEWSWEEK'S Troops in the Persian Gulf page 4:

On the war:  Before the fighting began, I talked to one American military 
officer who was quite an expert on desert warfare.  I asked him what he
THOUGHT and he said, "We will just whip the snot out of the (the 
Iraquis)."  And he was so right.

On covering the conflict:  This was my first assignment as a reporter,
and I FOUND it wonderful in that I had more freedom.  As a commander I was 
stuck at a post.

As a reporter I got a better overview.  But I was very unhappy with the
military's PARANOIA and their THOUGHT police who control the press.

There was the danger of being killed by Iraquis.  Second, there was the danger
of being killed going to the field because you had to travel a long way over
narrow roads that are used not only by you but also by Arabs who go as fast as
they can go without REALIZING they're driving a life-and-death bomb.  Third,
you had U.S. Army 19-year olds driving flatbed trailers loaded with 65-ton
tanks and playing chicken on the road.


PERISCOPE page 6:

\fIGrilling Baker\fR

"The trail's going to reach Baker," says a Senate staffer.  "Either he KNEW 
and approved the policy, or he was asleep at the switch."
     A key witness at the hearing will likely be U.S. Ambassador to Iraq April
Glaspie, who said whe was carrying out Baker's instructions when she told
Saddam just days before the invasion that THE UNITED STATES HAD NO INTEREST in
"Arab-Arab conflicts."  Since then Glaspie has been kept "under wraps" by
State.

That was clearly her own and totally inappropriate for an ambassador,"
says the staffer.  Baker has said he KNEW nothing of the specific dilpomatic 
instructions to Glaspie.


\fIBad News for Arthur Kent\fR 

Irving's been flooded with mash notes from elderly English ladies-and one
"very persistent female in America."  She sent him a pen set.  He PLANS to
return it.


\fI A Network Failure\fR

American intelligence officials SUSPECT that Saddam Hussein has lost control
of his terror network.  The air was severly damaged Baghdad's military-
communications system-which may have been used to coordinate terror attacks.
When he re-established communications, U.S. officials say, Iraqi-linked 
groups may have refused Saddam's calls, SENSING that he was a loser.  
Western officials have also heard that some terrorists, including the 
Palestine Liberation Front's Abul Addas, have fled Baghdad.  U.S. OFFICIALS
BELIEVE "Palestinian groups may be asking, 'Why waste our assets on Saddam?'"
.bp


\fICrowing\fR

Memo to the Democrats:  As you might have GUESSED, the Republican National
Committee's opposition-research team is keeping tabs on what was said about
the Persian Gulf conflict by potential Democratic presidential contenders, 
especially New York Gov. Mario Cuomo.  RNC staffers are crowing over what they
call "the appeasement tape," which confirms remarks by Cuomo last November
urging Bush to "negotiate our way out" of the crisis.


LETTERS  page 12-13

\fIThe Hardware Debate\fR

I was APPALLED by the headline on the cover of your Feb. 18 issue, "High-
Tech Hardware:  How Many Lives Can It Save?"  Military hardware is designed
not to save lives but to end them ever more effciently.

As a teacher and the mother of two Marines stationed in the gulf, I FOUND 
your poster highly informative.  I PLAN to share it with my students and my 
support group.

It simply compunds the tragedy by indicating that we have not learned from our
mistakes.  As a Vietnam veteran, I FEEL no humiliation for having served, and
I will hardly FEEL redeemed by a win this time.


\fIPatriotism\fR

Since the Persian Gulf War began, a constant theme in letters from readers has
been patriotism.  Here is a typical example from the mail as the war drew to a
close:  "I ONLY HOPE this same fervor Americans are exhibiting will carry over
in other ways" now that peace is near.  While many readers were ENTHUSIASTIC
about patriotism, a substantial number THOUGHT our coverage bordered on 
glorification of the war.  For example, there were complaints about "Weapons
of War," the Feb. 18 special pullout detailing gulf weaponry.


\fIJustifying War\fR

"Ancient Theory and Modern War" represents the origins of the just-war ethic 
as "essentially religious, usually Christian," highlighting Saint Augustine's
theology (HOME FRONT, Feb 11).  Yet the article IGNORES the first three 
centuries of Christian practice-which was to reject military service as
incompatible with Jesus' teachings.  Augustine's doctrine of the just war has
proven impotent, at any rate, to ensure strictly just wars.


\fILiving by the Sword\fR

The law of war is a two-edged sword.  Under the argument that Eric L. Chase
advances to justify killing Saddam Hussein ("Should We Kill Saddam?" MY TURN,
Feb 18.), an Iraqi operative who killed the president of the United States
could just as logically claim that George Bush, as "commander in chief of all
[U.S.] forces, is a legitimate target for any form of military action his enemy
ELECTS to take, whether he is killed on the battlefield or in his bathtub."


\fILanguage Lessons\fR

Your report on the record number of immigrant children in American schools
points up the need for more trained teachers of English as a second language
(ESL) across the country ("Classrooms of Babel," EDUCATION, Feb. 11).  KNOWING
how to teach nonnative children is a skill that requires training and
experience.  Yet in nearly half the states in this country, teachers are not
required to have training in multicultural/multilanguage teaching.  Even when
school administrators bow to the need for ESL, they OFTEN REGARD it as a
peripheral aspect of the curriculum, applicable to just a few students.  In
fact, the demand for qualified ESL teachers has been growing-and will probably
continue to grow.

Your readers might be INTERESTED TO LEARN that a federally funded program 
called Computer Education for Language Learning (CELL) is making big strides 
in teaching English to immigrant children.  The program is designed to
improve English sentence-building and vocabulary skills among students
with limited English proficiency.

The clearest indication of these programs' failure, she charges, is the high 
dropout rate for Hispanic children.  Porter must not be AWARE THAT more than
75 percent of Hispanic children never participate in a bilingual program.
Students who \fIhave\fR had the chance, in fact, have a very low dropout 
rate.  If more Hispanics were offered bilingual education, their dropout
statistics, I BELIEVE, would plummet.


\fIAfter the Storm\fR  page 26-29

George Bush KNEW it was over.  For weeks he decreed no end to the war until Saddam Hussein waved a white flag for all the world to see.

By last Wednesday, Saddam continued to shriek his defiance, even claiming
"victory" over the allied attackers.  But only four days into the ground war,
Iraq's Army was so thoroughly whipped that continuing the campaign might have
SEEMED cruel or vengeful.  Bush DECIDED not to wait for an explicit surrender.
He would declare victory himself and offer a truce.  "I'D LIKE to do it
tonight," he told his advisers.
     The land war came to an end after exactly 100 hours; a White House offical
NOTICED the round number coming up at midnight Wednesday, and the temporary
cease-fire was set to begin then.  Operation Desert Storm, which started just
six weeks before with the launching of the air war, produced a stunning victory
for Bush, a triumph of almost Biblical proportions-his enemy slain in countless
numbers, his own soldiers hardly touched by the battlefield's scouring wind.

page 27

But success left Bush feeling a little blue.  On Friday, when a reporter noted
at a news conference that the president SEEMED "somber," Bush conceded that he
didn't yet SHARE "THIS WONDERFUL EUPHORIC FEELING" THAT HAD SWEPT up so many of
his countrymen.  He recalled World War II, the first great cursade of his life.

But the allied commander, Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, still had to meet in the
desert with Iraqi officers early this week to settle the details of permanent
cease-fire, including an exchange of prisoners.  Secretary of State James Baker
PLANNED to tour the Middle East this week-including his first visit to Israel
since taking office-to discuss long-term issues, notably how to secure a
lasting peace in the region and what to do about the Palestinian problem.  More
immediately, difficult decisions had to be made about how extensively Iraq
should be punished for its invasion of Kuwait and for the atrocities it
committed there.

There were unconfirmed stories of anti-Saddam unrest in Baghdad and in Basra,
Iraq's second city.  The allies were EAGER to see Saddam go; they hinted that
Iraq's punishment would be gentler and its recovery quicker if he were replace.
But an alternative to Sabbam's discredited regime had not yet emerged.

"His own people can deal with him," said Prince Khalid bin Sultan, the Saudi
Arabian military commander.  A senior administration official concluded: "It's
realistic to THINK he will find some way to stay, just as he always has.  We
would be more SURPRISED if he left."
     Saddam's forces began to disintegrate as soon as the allied ground offensive began.

page 28

Iraqi Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz offered to comply with one of the U.N.
resolutions, then with three of them, insisting that the others be dropped.
That was UNACCEPTABLE to the allies.  It wasn't CLEAR what the Iraqis were up
to.  Aziz, a Christian with little clout in Iraqi politics, could have been
freelancing.

Aziz's first letter was written in Arabic, translated into Russian and then
into English.  When the Americans showed it to an Iraqi delegate at the United
Nations, he had it translated back into Arabic and FOUND that its meaning had
been warped, as if in some giddy parlor game.
     By midday on Wednesday, Washington time, the end was in sight.

When should the fighting be suspended?  "If you go on another day," Powell
said, "you're basically just fighting stragglers."
     Saddam had not yet been heard from, but Bush's men CONCLUDED that they had
him in a corner.  They would not wit for his public acceptance of the U.N.
resolutions.

"It was a marvelous piece of statecreaft," said an allied diplomat, Mohammed
Wahby of Egypt.  "President Bush KNEW the job was done.  If he kept on after
that, it might SMACK of vengefulness, and that would cause REPERCUSSIONS in the
Arab world."
     Boot Kissing: The SHOCK WAS JUST SETTING IN.  At the United Nations,
Muslim journalists were STUNNED when television pictures showed Iraqi POWs
kissing the boots of an American officer.  "That is wrong," said an Iranian
correspondent.  "That is a position that should be reserved for Allah-not even
for a prophet."  Most Iraqis still seemed OBLIVIOUS to the full extent of their
military defeat.  But they were all too well AWARE that their country-one of
the more advanced in the Arab world before the invasion of Kuwait-had been
bombed back into the pre-oil era.  In Baghdad, the electricity was out, and the
public water supply, what there was of it, was turning foul.

page 29

American intelligance sources said Saddam had three planes standing by at a
military airfield near Baghdad, apparently to fly him out of the country if the
need arose.  The influential French daily Le Monde claimed by might go to
Algeria; the Algerians denied it.  AMERICAN INTELLIGENCE THOUGHT he might head
for Mauritania, but the government of the North African country denied a report
in Le Monde that Saddam's family was already there.  No one KNEW who would
succeed Saddam if he fled or fell; a diplomat in Jordan described his inner
circle as "a cast of incognitos."  "Paradoxically, it might be better if he
stays," said Efraim Karsh of the Department of War Studies at King`s College in
London.  "At least you KNOW with whom you're dealing, and at least you KNOW he
has been weakend."
     In any case, the allies were not going to let the Iraqis off
easily.

Iraq accepted within 20 hours.  "Somebody there KNOWS how badly
they've been beaten and how vulnerable they are, and is essentially
saluting, at least up to this stage, when we tell them they need to do
something," said a U.S official.  The meeting, which was scheduled for
last Saturday and then moved to Sunday because the Iraqis weren't
ready, was to deal with practical matters, such as the exchange of
prisoners and the location of mines that Iraq had planted in Kuwait


At the United Nations, Washington prevailed on a new Security Council

the Soviets, the United States did not insist on a statement
explicitly authorizing the allies to resume military action if Iraq
failed to comply with U.N. terms.  Instead, the measure invoked
Resolution 678, which authorized force in the first place.

At least some Western forces will remain on the ground in the region
for months to come.  But the allies will be ANXIOUS not to create the
impression that they MEAN TO stay.  Instead, WASHINGTON WANTS a small
tripwire force to be put into place by the Arabs or the United
Nations, supplemented by pre-positioned equipment.  Among other
things, it isn't CLEAR WHETHER the peacekeeping force would be
stationed in Iraq or Kuwait.
     When to lift the sanctions:  WASHINGTON WANTS to retain the U.N.
arms embargo indefinitely.  Economic sanctions are another matter, but
the decision on revoking them depends on whether Saddam remains in
power, and for how long.  "We can use [sanctions] in two ways-to
moderate Saddam's behavior and to CONVINCE the Iraqi people or the
Iraqi military that they'd be better off with a different leader,"
says a State Department official.  Even if Saddam stays on
indefinitely, sanctions on food and medicine are likely to be lifted
quickly.

But there will be trade-offs in other areas, notably Iraqi oil sales
and imports of civilian technology.  If BAGHDAD WANTS those
restrictions lifted, it might have to pay reparation, reduce the size
allied forces are attempting to sort out the war cirminals and
assemble evidence against them.

The overall case is "open and shut," says Benjamin Ferencz, a former
Nuremberg prosecutor who teaches law at Pace University in White
Plains, NY.  "I would be DELIGHTED TO prosecute these charges," he
says.  "I'd win them, hands down."  But there may be few war-crimes trials--possibly none at all.  

And if the allies hold Iraqis for trail, Baghdad may retaliate by
detaining allied pilots and other POWs on war-crime charges.  So far,
Kuwait and Saudi Arabia WANT Iraqi wrongdoers to stand trial;  other
allies, such as Egypt, do not.  Secretary Baker will try to sort out
the problem during his trip to the region this week.

Exacting reparations for the gulf war might also be
counter-productive.  "We WANT to make sure we don't wind up destroying
Iraq in the process," says political scientise Joseph Nye of Harvard.
Iraq's debt to the people and government of Kuwait could range up to
$100 billion.z

The allies seem to agree that the principle of reparations is
important.  "To ACCEPT the idea means to accept the guilt," says a
senior Arab diplomat, "and they must accept the guilt.  But making
them pay?  That's another matter."

Precisely how much of the reparations will be forgiven depends in part
on how quickly Saddam passes from the scene.  "The last thing we'd
WANT to do is cripple a new government," says a U.S. official.  After
suffering the mother of all defeats, Saddam still has a grip on Iraq's
future, if only as a force for misery.


\fIThe Rewards of Leadership\fR  page 30

The remark was unscripted--a brief burst of spontaneous joy at the end
of his prepared remarks.
     To a nation OPPRESSED BY THE SENSE  of decline, jaded by two
decades of failed presidencies and political scandal, Bush's
performance SEEMED like deliverance.  Even more so because it was
UNEXPECTED, coming from a man who had been widely dismissed as a wimp
and a lapdog.  To the American people today, the W word is "winner."

     Certainly the Democrats think so.  They eye the president's
record-breaking approval rating-89 percent in the latest
\fINewsweek\fR Poll-and WONDER if they will ever see the inside of the
White House again.  There was a flurry of excitement last week in
Democratic circles when party elder Robert Strauss called a council of
veteran campaign operatives.

To announce or anoint a new challenger?  Well, not quite.  Strauss
WANTED some help thinking up jokes for the annual Gridiron Dinner.
     Perhaps Bush has always been underestimated.

But a more enduring political image is of Bush trying, by small tinny
sounds, to placate the Republican right.  LESS WELL KNOWN are the
examples of Bush showing fortitude behind the scenes.  It was Bush
whose coolness restored calm to the White House in March 1981 when
Ronald Reagan was shot and Secretary of State Alexander Haig bizarrely
declared,  "I am in control."

Along the way, he established a comfort level with the American people
that would prove useful when the cirsis came.  The chattering classes
may have DOUBTED Bush, but the public BELIEVED in his leadership
skills over the last six months, and they were rewarded.
     Bush is now urged to use his immense political captial to push
through some kind of New American Order at home.

In all likelihood, however, he won't.  He doesn't BELIEVE the
country's problems are susceptible to easy or quick political
solutions.  His approach is pragmatic, in a country-club Republican
sort of way.

Others, like the poor, are always with us.  His more cynical political
advisers are just THINKING about re-election.  Their plan is, not
surprisingly, to blame Congress.  "If the Democratic Congress would
just move out of the way, we could get some major things done,"
groused a senior Bush adviser.

The next two years are far more likely to produce mushy compromises or
  paralysis than quick and clean military victories.  Americans will
soon enough RELEARN the limits of power.  Already, pundits are warning
against incipient "triumphalism.'


\fIA Soldier of Conscience\fR  page 32-34

In the days after victory, the general kept waking up THINKING he was
bach in August.  Across the border in Kuwait, Saddam Hussein was
leering at him, Suadi Arabia was wide open to attack, his own troops
were hopelessly out-numbered.

And his orders were to clean up the mess without taking too many
casualties.  The general KNEW that given time America had the power
to defeat Iraq.  That wasn't what BOTHERED him.  What BOTHERED him was
that he didn't WANT to live the rest of his life with the THOUGHT,
"There's Norm Schwarzkopf, the Butcher of Baghdad," a commander who
got 100,000 Americans killed with chemical weapons because of his
stupid planning.  "I LIKE TO THINK of myself as a man of conscience,"
he told \fINewsweek\fR.  In war, questions of generalship often sort
badly with matters of principle.  And the question most important to
him was "KNOWING whether or not I can live with myself."
     Did George Patton think that way?

page 33

He did have a flaw or two, including a hair-trigger temper and and a
thin skin for bad reviews.  An old paratrooper's injury gave him
chronic back pain, and until he closed with Saddam, there were those
who WONDERED WHETHER someone leaner and younger might have been better
fit to command.  What they FORGOT was his 170 IQ, his three Silver
Stars for valor and his reputation for risking his own life to help
soldiers in danger of losing theirs.  Taking over CentCom two years
ago, he whipped a Sleepy Hollow headquarters into fighting trim. 

The Middle East was his area of operations.  He BELIEVED this theater
would produce the next war.  Saddam obliged him.

Then he went out there.  Poking the desert with his foot, he
DISCOVERED that it could support trucks as well as tanks and he got to
work deploying his assets.  Saddam might have hurt him by using
chemical weapons to choke off the supply port of Dhahran.

Night after night Schwarzkopf badgered Air Force Lt. Gen. Charles
Horner ("They can't get through...You're \fIguaranteeing\fR me that,
right?").  The day the air war began and Saddam lost control of the
skies, he THOUGHT WITH relief, "We've got them."
     The CONVICTION SPRANG from Schwarzkopf's certainty that Saddam
could no longer escape, not from his love for rival services.  In
Schwarzkopf's briefing, he praised Horner, the Marines, the Special
Forces, allies and just about everyone else involved in whipping
Saddam; but he remained Army Green right down to his combat boots.  He
had COUNTED ON planes to maul Saddam's defenses, play hell with his
command-and-control network, savage his Air Force and artillery,
neutralize his chemical weaponry.  But he KNEW air power alone could
not win the war.  Part of the problem was tactical, part political.
At THE BACK OF HIS MIND HE WONDERED, "How long would the world stand
by and watch the United States pound the living hell out of Iraq
without saying, 'Wait a minute--enough is enough'."  He ITCHED to send
ground troops  to finish the job.
     His DEEPER CONCERN was to reverse the damage Vietnam had done to
the Army's morale and the country's self-esteem.  After serving two
tours in that quagmire, he emerged with scars to match his war medals.

He told C.D.B. Bryan, author of "Friendly Fire," that after he came
home as a lieutenant colonel in 1970, it shook him to find Americans
spitting on soldiers as napalm addicts and baby burners.  According to
Bryan's account in The New Republic, Schwarzkopf THOUGHT for a time he
would quit, retreat to the woods.  One day when his sister Sally
defended the peace movement, he blew up and threw her out of his
house.  Then, to HIS AMAZEMENT, he burst into tear.  For years he
didn't KNOW WHETHER he had Vietnam out of his system.  He KNEW one
thing:  if it ever came to a choice between compromising his moral
principles and performing his duties, he would resign his commission,
hang up his uniform and go with his principles.

Between August and March, he passed a number of milestones:  the
meeting after Iraq invaded Kuwait when Saudi Arabia's King Fahd said
to him, "Come"; the successful defense that pinned Saddam down; the
RECOGNITION that the only way to get him out of Kuwait was to eject
him; the DECISION to begin the air campaign.  Then there was Saddam's
forlorn attack on Khafji, when he began TO THINK , "We are going to
kick this guy's tail."  The moment Saddam's highly vaunted Fifth
Division came under fire, it broke and surrendered en masse.  Saddam
might have a 700,000-man Army, but when Schwarzkopf looked at what it
could do, HE THOUGHT, "This was a lousy outfit.  Lousy."  At that
moment, his own troops were honed to perfection-and ready for the
kill.

     Schwarzkopf's military philosophy turns on his regard for the arts of
war and his respect for the lives of ordinary soldiers.  When a
reporter asked him what he THOUGHT of Saddam's leadership, he said,
"Hah."  Ticking off his contempt on the fingers of his left hand, he
noted that Saddam was "neither a strategist, nor is he schooled in the
operational art, nor is he a tactician, nor is he a general, nor is he
a soldier."

Having run out of fingers, he said, "Other than that, he
ielite Republican Guard.  They were better trained, better paid, better
fed, and , "Oh, by the way, stationed well to the rear so they could
be the first ones to bug out," while ordinary soldiers who had been
lied to, badly equipped and fed were left to bear the brunt of the
allied assault.

page 34

     Other military briefers had ham-handedly sparred with reporters;
Schwarzkopf juggled toughness wit humor.  Someone asked him if the
allied advance to within 100 miles of Baghdad might have ENCOURAGED
SADDAM TO THINK the coalition was going all the way.  "I wouldn't have
minded at all," he said, adding, "Frankly, I don't think they ever
KNEW [we] were there until the door had already been closed on them."
     Schwarzkopf has great physical courage; armchair tactician
irritate him.  His mouth pursed tightly when a reporter asked if Iraqi
fortifications might have been less formidable than everyone had been
led TO BELIEVE.  "Have you ever been in a mine-field?" he snapped.


\fIThe Military's New Image\fR  page 50-51

The videotape said it all:  Saddam Hussein's humiliation and the
allies' triumph, the victors and the vanquished indelibly joined in
the grainy immediacy of battlefront journalism.  It signified, as few
war photos have ever done, qualities of national character that
Americans LIKE TO THINK are unique to them:  power and restraint, an
easy CONFIDENCE in the rightness of the American cause that is
TEMPERED BY MAGNANIMITY in victory.
     The unequivocal success of Operation Desert Storm was every bit
as EDIFYING to the nation's military.  FOR THE GENERALS, and for men
and women in the service everywhere, the lighting victory over the
world's fourth largest army was a long-awaited rebuttal to those who
had predicted tragedy and disillusionment in the Persian Gulf.  The
"miraculous" casualty figures seemed to vindicate the Pentagon's
multibillion-dollar investment in high-tech weaponry during the past
10 years.

The sweeping precision of the allied assaults into Kuwait and Iraq,
slicing through and rolling up much-vaunted enemy units like Iraq's
Republican Guard, demonstrated the combat readiness of the
all-volunteer military and the competence of U.S. commanders.  Beyond
all that, for many in the services, Desert Storm ASSUAGED THE UGLY
MEMORY of Vietnam.  "The stigma of Vietnam has been erased," said an
Army officer at the Pentagon.

"That's one of the reasons a complete and total victory was
necessary."
     MESMERIZED by the bloodless unreality of the Nintendo-game air
war and WORRIED BY predictions of heavy casualties when the ground war
finally began, millions of Americans seemed caught up in the wave of
relief and patriotic euphoria that followed George Bush's cease-fire
declaration last week.  "We didn't shut off the TV until 4 o'clock
this morning," said Vietnam veteran Arthur Stevenson of Everett,
Mass., whose son John is serving with the Navy in the Persian Gulf.
"I FELT LIKE running out and putting up a sign saying, 'You done good,
John!'"

The gusher of adulation conferred instant celebrity on Pentagon
figures ranging from Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney to press
spokesman Pete Williams, who was suddenly being mentioned as a
possible gubernatorial candidate in his home state of Wyoming.  The
Bear-Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf--became a box-office blow-out on the
strength of his masterful after-action briefing in Riyadh:  in
\fINewsweek's\fR Poll, 93 percent of the public had A FAVORABLE
OPINION of Desert Storm's commander, which was 3 points higher than
the president.  Gen. Colin Powell, whose rise to the chairmanship of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff personified the expanding opportunities for
African-Americans in uniform (page 54), trailed Bush by only 4 points.

page 51

"One of the most important things to happen since August has been the
ease with which our country has adjusted to women in the gulf," said
Elizabeth Fox-Genovese, director of women's studies at Emory
University.  "To see women performing well, with no drama or fanfare,
SEEMS TO ME to be more striking than anything else women have done
lately.  And because of television, it is WRITTEN IN THE PUBLIC
CONSCIOUSNESS now."
     It was hard to say just how much ordinary Americans CARED ABOUT
the promise of a new world order or the prospects for long-term
stability in the Middle East.  But they CARED a lot about supporting
the troops, and there were many signs of LESSENED TOLERANCE toward
those opposing the war.  Sentimental or not, the contagion of yellow
ribbons seemed to flow from a "DESIRE to make up for the way the
military was treated after Vietnam," said historian Robert Dallek of
UCLA.  Skeptics like Todd Gitlin, a leading antiwar protestor in the
1960s and a sociologist at the University of California, Berkeley,
today, argued that the military's current prestige in part reflects
Americans' long love affair with winners.

The weapons--smart bombs, Patriot missiles, even the Bradely fighting
vehicle--all looked like winners.  "What will come out of this war in
A RENEWED SENSE of American superiority and confidence in the
country's military technology," Dallek said.  "That was lost in
Vietnam, because there was a guerrilla army that managed to stand up
to American power."

Above all, Watman said, Desert Storm proved the soundness of the
military's obession with big-ticket, precision-guided weaponry.  "In
the history of war, I DON'T THINK there's ever been such a
disproportionate battle as this," Watman said.  Smart weapons
"resulted in a fabulous saving of life," and "even if they don't do
anything from here on out, they took a war that could have cost us
thousands [of lives] and it cost us less than a hundred."

     You could argue, as Daniel Ellberg did, that the gulf war will only
reinforce America's relaince on military power in international
conflict--and you could argue, with historian Gerald Linderman of the
University of Michigan, that the antiseptic quality of the Nintendo
war was dangerously misleading to the young.  Desert Storm "was a war
that SEEMED to bring to life the best of the video games," Linderman
said.  "We have seen no soldiers subjected to seemingly endless
artillery barrages [or] cradling dying comrades."

     This pessimism seemed at least some-what overstated.  Few in
Washington THING the success of Desert Storm will prevent Congress and
the Bush administration from making significant cuts in the Pentagon
budget, and \fINewsweek's\fR poll shows that most Americans are still
RELUCTANT to support distant military adventures.  The real lesson of
the gulf war, one Army officer mused last week, was that "as a people
and as an army, we shouldn't get a FAT HEAD about this."  Sound
advice--especially at a euphoric moment when America and its warriors
were riding very high.


\fIClippings From the Media War\fR  page 52

     As any radio-talk-show host can attest, Iraq isn't the only loser in
the gulf war.  Though a surprising 59 percent of Americans in the
\fINewsweek\fR Poll THINK BETTER of the news media than before the
war, the press corps also took some pounding.  News organizations were
routed by the military in the battle over access and assaulted by many
viewers.

In the blame game, the real culprits are news executives who agreed to
the silly rules long before the war.  If they HAD THREATENED not to
participate, the restrictions might well have been loosened.  At
bottom, the military needs TV to build and sustain support for the war
even more than TV needs the military to build ratings.

The problem was at CNN headquarters in Atlanta.  The network wrongly
THOUGHT its boilerplate desclaimer after his broadcasts ended its
obligation to provide context for his reports.  This is where CNN
squandered its early lead in the coverage.

Dan Rather getting teary and shaking hands with Lt. Gen. Walt Boomer
should have been done off camera, where human emotions would not
interfere with a story that was plenty dramatic on its own.  Contrary
to what the ads for local news shows say, real journalists keep their
FEELINGS from getting in the way.
     But commendable dispassion should not be confused with
neutrality.


\fIThe Battle for Respect\fR page 54-57

     When the prospect of a bloody ground war loomed, many black
Americans FEARED that the first to fall in the desert would be those
who are often lost to prosper at home--their sons, daughters and
spouses.  For a group comprising just 12 percent of the U.S.
population, the burdens of battle SEEMED unjustly heavy:  the 104,000
blacks in the Kuwait theater represented 20 percent of the total U.S.
deployment in the gulf.  But many of those black troops didn't SEE IT
that way.  "I don't have time for anything else than looking after my
battalion and my men," said Marine Lt. Col. Buster Diggs.  "When you
have been living like this for six months, numbers and percentages
don't MEAN very much.  All I WANT to do is bring back everybody, black
and white."
     Victory in the desert won't end the national debate about who
fights our wars.

Up and down the chain of command, the war showcased stalwart models of
black achievement, from Joint Chiefs Chairman Colin Powell, to deputy
Desert Storm commander Gen. Calvin Waller, to three members of the
Patriot missle crew decorated for shooting down Scuds over Riyadh.
The rigid enforcement of antidiscrimination rules has placed
unprecedented numbers of black men and women in positions of power,
winning them a legitimacy they FIND nearly impossible to duplicate
outside the service.  "The military is so far advanced from the
civilian population, it's pathetic," says Sgt. Charles Lewis Davis, an
Army recruiter in Los Angeles.

page 56

Many blacks point to Powell, a son of Jamaican immigrants with a
public-school education, as an example of what's attainable for
blacks.  "That brother came a long way," says Remon Allen, an
18-year-old from Chicago WHO PLANNED TO enlist.  "He started out just
how I did...In the military, we've got a fair shake."

page 57

Six years ago Mark Bright, the son of a Washington, D.C., dentist, had
a bachelor's degree and a bank job.  After rejection from a
management-training program--for what he BELIEVES were racial
reasons--he joined the Navy.  He's now a lieutenant on the
guided-missile cruiser USS Gridley.  "I've lived on both sides of the
fence," says Bright, 31.  "The Navy is by far a less racially
motivated lifestyle."

Manpower cutbacks in the post-Desert Storm military are likely to put
an added squeeze on opportunities for advancement.
     Those who do make it to the top can't COUNT ON moving into the
kinds of lucrative civilian jobs available to white counterparts.  A
recent survey of 30 retired black generals found just one had landed a
top private position.


\fIA Land Fit for Heroes?\fR page 78

America has had a lot of practice at war-thinking and practice make,
if not perfect, close enough.
     America has now fought its sixth war since the battleship Maine
blew up (by accident, it now SEEMS) in Havana harbor in 1898.  The war
with Spain and two world wars and Korea and Vietnam and the Gulf War
are only America's largest combat experiences since the explosion in
the Maine.  THAT EXPLOSION SHOWERED SPARKS ON THE DRY TINDER OF
AMERICAN NATIONALISM and detonated the "splendid little war" that made
a president of the Rough Rider of San Juan Hill.  One of George Bush's
first gestures as president was to put TR's portrait in the Cabinet
Room, in the place where Bush's predecessor had put a portrait of
Coolidge.

America was not attacked by Iraq and was not committed by treaty to
the defense of Kuwait, which has never been defined as a vital
American interest.  Korea was a war of post-Munich deterrence, an
attempt to DISCOURAGE future aggression by being prompt and early with
collective security.  Desert Storm was similar, but was more.

(One month into the crisis President Bush flew to Finland for a
five-hour luncheon summit to stroke Gorbachev.  In the last weeks of
the crisis America's dismissive response to Gorbachev's mischievous
diplomacy proved that the Soviet Union often can be as irrelevant as
AMERICA WANTS IT TO BE.)  Desert Storm was a didactic war, waged to
instruct potential aggressors in new rules for the game of nations.

     If the teaching takes, the new world may be so orderly that
America can allow its well-oiled combat arms to become rusty.  If not,
AMERICANS, who have not been so happy since V-J Day(Aug. 15, 1945),
probably will BE WILLING, EVEN EAGER, to lead other coalitions into
combat.  If so, one reason will be that a generation of younger
Americans has been taught a quite false lesson by Desert Storm:  that
wars usually work out this way, short and one-sided and telegenic.

     Another reason Americans are so happy, and so ready to do more
great works abroad, is that thing, especially things done by
government, have not beel=n working so well at home.  Americans gave
FOUND domestic problems intractable and foreign commercial competition
daunting.  The production of many things--cars, engineers, high SAT
scores, low budget deficits, livable cities--has faltered.

(During the 43 days of Desert Storm, violence in America killed many times
more American than war did.)  AMERICANS ARE DELIGHTED to find a few
things that work--weapons, the military generally.  In recent years it
has become a sardonic just to say of something not done right, "Well,
it's close enough for government work."  

     Dreadful Decade:  In one dreadful decade, 1965-74, government's
stature was radically reduced.  Great Society initiatives coincided
with extreme disorders among the INTENDED beneficiaries of the
initiatives.  This stimulated SKEPTICISM about government's
competence.  Then Vietnam and Watergate SPREAD CYNICISM about
government's motives.  Since then the American left has been CAUGHT IN
A CONTRADICTION. 
     The LEFT WANTS strong government to engineer social change.  But
the left's critical stance defeats its political program:  by defining
America as greedy, corrupt, racist, etc., the left UNDERMINES THE
CONSENSUS that is required for strong collective action.  Furthermore,
because of its HOSTILITY toward the military, the left has forfeited
the fundamental game of American politics-capture the flag.  The party
that identifies with American nationalism wins.
     FOR CONSERVATIVES, today's military success compounds a paradox.
Ronald Reagan climbed to the pinnacle of government by teaching
DISTRUST OF GOVERNMENT.  But by putting a smiling face on government,
and by curbing inflaction (government's damage to the currency as a
store of value), and by making the military conspicuous, competent and
usable, he did much to rehabilitate government's reputation.

Reagan's successor, by his deft diplomacy and his selection of superb
colleagues, has consolidated the conservtive party's position as the
party of executive government.
     For 40 years most conservatives have had a BIFURCATED VISION of
government:  It should be bold abroad but tentative at home.
CONSERVATIVES BELIEVE government is a blunt instrument, not a precision
tool--a hammer, not a scalpel.  It is good at big, broad
strokes--digging a canal across an isthmus, waging war--but clumsy at
intervening in the organic processes of a complex society such as
ours.
     This PRINCIPLE, DISTILLED FROM MANY HISTORICAL JUDGEMENTS, is
broadly right but not sufficient.  Government is not irrelevant to or
impotent against the biggest threats to American pre-eminence, which
are here at home.

     Today George Bush stand at the sort of pinnacle few presidents
have experienced.  He has EARNED THE NATION'S TRUST and, almost as
important, he has THE NATION'S ATTENTION.  This is a perishable
moment, and a propitious moment to say:  As we welcome home the heroes
from their sacrifices to make this a land fit for heroes.
